

===== PAGE 1 =====
A continuum multi-species biofilm model with a novel
interaction scheme
Felix Klempt, Hendrik Geisler, Meisam Soleimani, Philipp Junker
Leibniz University Hannover, Institute of Continuum Mechanics, Hannover, Germany
Corresponding author:
Felix Klempt,  klempt@ikm.uni-hannover.de
Abstract
Biofilms are complex structures which are inhabited by numerous amount of different species
of microorganisms. Due to their ubiquity, they influence human life on an everyday basis. It
is therefore important to understand the interactions between different biofilm components and
reactions to outside conditions. For this purpose, mathematical models and in silico experiments
have proven themselves to be fundamental. In combination within vitro and in vivo experiments,
they can give more insights and focus researchers’ attention, reducing costs in the process. In this
work, a comprehensive multi-species continuum-based biofilm model is presented. This model
is capable of replicating a variety of different biofilm interactions with an arbitrary number of
species, while still being comprehensive to encourage usage by researchers less familiar with
mathematical modeling. In addition to a nutrient source, antibiotic agents and their effect on
the biofilm can also be depicted. The model is derived using Hamilton’s principle of stationary
action, ensuring thermodynamic consistency automatically. The results show good quantitative
agreement with biofilm behavior.
Keywords: biofilm, multi-species, biofilm interaction, continuum model
1 Introduction
The necessity to model and simulate biofilm behavior stems from the ubiquity of microbial
biofilms. It is estimated that half of the existing biomass are prokaryotes [30, 6]. Much of that
mass is located in dense biofilm communities, containing hundreds of species, i.e., upwards of 500
different species in dental biofilms [10, 18]. In these multi-species systems, complex interactions
and relationships between different species emerge [23, 8]. The first, theoretical interaction is
Neutralism, if biofilms do not interact at all with each other. With a lack of enough resources,
i.e., space, nutrients or other necessary compounds, different species of bacteria have to compete
with each other. Often times, the biofilm is then dominated by one species, but other ones
persist in the biofilm [8]. If both species benefit from the presence of one another, it is called
Protocooperation. This has been demonstrated often in biofilms [8]. Other interactions are Al-
lelopathy [25], where one species produces chemicals, which in turn influence the others. This
can lead to Ammensalism, where one species harms the other and Commensalism, where one
1
arXiv:2509.01274v1  [cs.CE]  1 Sep 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
species benefits from the other. These interactions lead to the stabilization of the biofilm [8].
To control harmful and use beneficial biofilms, an understanding of the underlying principles is
necessary, but the large number of interactions pose a challenge for in vitro experiments [24].
Mathematical models can provide an environment where hypotheses can be tested rapidly and
connections between different aspects can be drawn. Additionally, an in silico experiment, i.e.,
a simulation, takes considerably less time than an in vitro or an in vivo experiment. Models
based on mathematical descriptions have thus proven themselves to be a viable tool in analyz-
ing complicated processes [3]. Prominent modeling approaches are Individual Based Modeling
(IbM), cellular automaton (CA) and continuum-based modeling. IbM seems to be the natural
approach since the biofilm itself consists of individual particles. Behaviors like cell divisions and
interactions between two cells can be modeled directly as an interaction between two individual
particles. There exist several open-source software systems using this approach, such as Bac-
Sim [13], Infobiotics Workbench [2], iDynoMiCS [15], Simbiotics [21], and NUFEB [16]. IbM
models containing multiple species have been used to study the effects of EPS [12] as well as
detachment and sloughing [31, 32] on multi species biofilm. In combination with the contin-
uum approach, physical factors, like nutrient gradients, have been included [23, 20]. To avoid
the stochastic effects resulting from the randomized placement of the individual particles in the
modeling approach of IbM, the same simulation has to be repeated or it can be combined with
cellular automata rules, see [14]. Multi-species models based fully on cellular automata are, for
example, [19, 27, 28]. Another way of modeling biofilm is the continuum approach. Here, the in-
corporation of governing laws from physics comes naturally. Thermodynamic consistency can be
assured automatically when using the right modeling approach. The thermodynamics and me-
chanics of growth are discussed in detail by [4] and [17]. Additionally, continuum-based models
are deterministic, stochastic effects are thus not present and models do not need additional runs
to average out random effects before conclusions can be drawn. Although the derivation of these
models can be more complex, analytical studies can be performed to compare and characterize
model results [1]. The complexity of these models makes them very predictive, but also hard to
understand, especially for researchers not familiar with material modeling. Easier models can
focus the attention on more important and relevant aspects of biofilm formation and growth,
as well as species interaction. Multi-species continuum-based models in literature, which are
suitable to model an arbitrary number of species, i.e., [29, 1], link the species via shared re-
sources as space and nutrient available. This means that only competition between the species
can be depicted. Models, which can depict Protocooperation, solve the problem of interaction
with an additional interaction variable, which developes where one or both species are present
and enhance the growth process of the other species [26, 5]. For a small number of species, i.e.,
dual-species systems, this is a suitable approach, but since for every interaction between two
species an interaction variable is necessary, the number of internal variables and consequently
the computational cost becomes unreasonable when the number of species increases.
In this work, a continuum model is presented which provides a framework for integrating a the-
oretically arbitrary number of species into the biofilm. It is capable of displaying a wide variety
of possible interactions from mutually inhibitory species to a symbiotic relationship. The inte-
gration of interaction is done via a constant interaction matrix. Thus, no additional internal
variables need to be introduced. The model is derived from Hamilton’s principle of station-
ary action, ensuring thermodynamic consistency. The energy density function is modeled to be
comprehensive. The complexity of the model stems from the dissipation function, which is for-
mulated as a function of the product of the internal variables. It thus interconnects the governing
evolution equations leading to complex material behavior.
The article is structured as follows. In Section 2, the mathematical derivation of the model is
presented. The necessary variables and assumptions are introduced and the governing equations
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
are shown. In Section 3, a numerical study displaying the behavior of the models with differ-
ent numbers of species, initial conditions and parameters is presented to show the versatility
of the model. The last chapter, Section 4, gives a short conclusion and an outlook for future
investigations possible with this model.
2 Mathematical description
In this work, a comprehensive model for biofilm growth and death is presented. An arbitrary
number of species with interactions can be modeled. The model is derived based on Hamilton’s
principle of stationary action. Hamilton’s principle provides a physically sound way of material
modelling, in particular, the automatic fulfillment of the first and second law of thermodynamics
through the derivation of the model from a potential [9]. Thus, the biofilm model presented in
this work is thermodynamically consistent. In addition, necessary constraints can be considered
in Hamilton’s principle simply by adding corresponding potentials. Hamilton’s principle for a
quasi-static and isothermal process is given by [9, 11] as
(1) H “
ż
τ
pG ` C ` Dq dt Ñ stat
ξ,γ
.
The Hamilton functional H consists of three parts: the total potential G, the constraint func-
tional C and the dissipation energy D. Hamilton’s principle states that H is stationary for all
thermodynamic state variables. In this case, the thermodynamic state variables are the internal
variables ξ and the Lagrange multiplier γ.
In the following, the individual parts are described in more detail. The total potential G is given
as
(2) G :“
ż
Ω0
Ψ dV ´
ż
Ω0
 
0
f ‹ ¨ u dV ´
ż
BΩ0
 
0
t‹ ¨ u dA
with the Helmholtz free energy Ψ, the density ρ0, the body force f ‹, the traction force t‹ and the
displacements u. No external forces are applied to this biofilm model. Therefore, the external
forces f ‹ and t‹ are set to zero.
The constraint functional
(3) C :“
ż
Ω0
γ pf pξqq dV,
allows incorporation of the holonomic constraint f pξq with the Lagrange parameter γ.
The dissipated energy is given as
(4) D :“
ż
Ω0
Ddiss dV.
with the volume-specific dissipated potential D diss.
To arrive at a sensible description of a predictive model for biofilm growth and death, suitable
3
