

===== PAGE 1 =====
Continuum Mech. Thermodyn. (2021) 33:1931–1956
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00161-021-01017-z
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Philipp Junker · Daniel Balzani
An extended Hamilton principle as unifying theory for
coupled problems and dissipative microstructure evolution
Received: 9 September 2020 / Accepted: 23 April 2021 / Published online: 7 June 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract An established strategy for material modeling is provided by energy-based principles such that
evolution equations in terms of ordinary differential equations can be derived. However, there exist a variety
of material models that also need to take into account non-local effects to capture microstructure evolution. In
this case, the evolution of microstructure is described by a partial differential equation. In this contribution,
we present how Hamilton’s principle provides a physically sound strategy for the derivation of transient
ﬁeld equations for all state variables. Therefore, we begin with a demonstration how Hamilton’s principle
generalizes the principle of stationary action for rigid bodies. Furthermore, we show that the basic idea behind
Hamilton’s principle is not restricted to isothermal mechanical processes. In contrast, we propose an extended
Hamilton principle which is applicable to coupled problems and dissipative microstructure evolution. As
example, we demonstrate how the ﬁeld equations for all state variables for thermo-mechanically coupled
problems, i.e., displacements, temperature, and internal variables, result from the stationarity of the extended
Hamilton functional. The relation to other principles, as the principle of virtual work and Onsager’s principle,
is given. Finally, exemplary material models demonstrate how to use the extended Hamilton principle for
thermo-mechanically coupled elastic, gradient-enhanced, rate-dependent, and rate-independent materials.
Keywords Coupled processes · Multi-physics · V ariational modeling· Local and non-local effects
1 Introduction
Physical bodies are described by a varying number of state variables. For instance, two state variables are
necessary in a thermo-mechanical sense: displacements u and temperature θ. Other problems could be chemo-
mechanical ones with the displacements and the concentration of substances, electro-mechanical ones with the
displacements and the electric ﬁeld, or combinations of the latter. Particularly for solids, these state variables,
however, do not carry enough information to reﬂect the total state. The important inﬂuence of microstructure
and its time-dependent conﬁguration is not accounted for, i.e., for thermo-mechanically coupled problems, by
the primary state variables u and θ. To overcome this deﬁciency, additional variables for the “inner state” were
introduced between 1820 and 1850 by Carnot, Joule, and Clausius [ 9,12,28]. More details on the history are
g i v e ni n[27]. These variables are nowadays referred to as internal variables which might be denoted, arbitrarily,
Communicated by Marcus Aßmus, Victor A. Eremeyev and Andreas Öchsner.
P . Junker
Leibniz University Hannover, Institute of Continuum Mechanics, Hannover, Germany
D. Balzani ( B)
Chair of Continuum Mechanics, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
E-mail: daniel.balzani@rub.de

===== PAGE 2 =====
1932 P . Junker, D. Balzani
by the vector α. Then, the set {u,θ, α} completely describes the physical state of thermo-mechanically cou-
pled problems and dissipative microstructure evolution. Appropriate choices for α mimic the experimentally
observed material conﬁguration. However, a sophisticated challenge of modern mechanics is the develop-
ment of mathematical equations that describe how the microstructural state, given in terms of α,e v o l v e s .
Consequently, these equations are referred to as evolution equations and form the material model. Herein, a
material-speciﬁc choice ofα deﬁnes answers to questions as is it a plastic strain, a volume fraction, a hardening
or damage variable, or others.
Along with the choice which set of internal variables shall be used in the material model, the identiﬁcation
of constraints from experimentally observed material behavior is a crucial step during the derivation of a
related mathematical description of the material behavior. Then, the consideration of the constraints in terms
of mathematical formulas often turns out to be a non-trivial issue. It is thus convenient to derive material
models from a potential which might comprise several beneﬁts: ensurance of thermodynamic consistency
and simpliﬁed consideration of constraints by using appropriate Lagrange parameters. One potential-based
principle of material modeling is the principle of maximum dissipation. Here, the dissipation, being a function
of the thermodynamic driving forces p, is maximized to derive the evolution equations. The assumption
that (microstructural) processes maximize the dissipation is physically sound and, consequently, material
models that are derived by using this approach agree to the fundamental laws of physics. A similar potential-
based principle is given by the so-called principle of the minimum of the dissipation potential. In contrast
to the principle of maximum dissipation, the potential is here a function of the thermodynamic ﬂux ˙α such
that minimizing the dissipation potential directly results in the evolution equations. A subsequent Legendre
transformation of the associated dissipation function allows to identify the related yield function /Phi1if rate-
independent processes are modeled.
It is obvious that a model for a speciﬁc material should be able to describe the related processes with
sufﬁcient accuracy and, of course, must not contradict fundamental physical observations and their related
laws. These requirements still provide a huge variety to construct a speciﬁc material model. For instance, the
relation
˙α ∝ p (1)
is often used for rate-dependent processes. This proportionality between the thermodynamic driving force p,
which can be derived from the free energy density /Psi1by
p := − ∂/Psi1
∂α , (2)
and the thermodynamic ﬂux ˙α routes back to Onsager and is consequently known as Onsager’s principle. In
case of rate-independent processes, materials are modeled by deﬁning a suitable yield function /Phi1,a n dt h e
evolution of the internal variable is assumed to be obtained from a thermodynamic extremal principle, e.g.,
principle of maximum dissipation or principle of the minimum of the dissipation potential, yielding
˙α ∝ ∂/Phi1
∂p (3)
This procedure has proven to be beneﬁcial when quasi-static processes evolve. Whereas for appropriate choices
for /Phi1and using Onsager’s principle, it can be shown that such material models are thermodynamically sound
by construction, the veriﬁcation of the latter is usually a part of the derivation of a material model if other
modeling techniques are employed. Here, the Coleman–Noll procedure is used for the identiﬁcation of the
driving forces and thermodynamic consistency is proved by checking the dissipation inequality
p · ˙α ≥ 0 . (4)
However, a drawback of these potential-based approaches is that they are not suitable for the derivation of ﬁeld
equations for the internal variable. To be more precise, the inclusion of gradient terms is not possible since the
principle of maximum dissipation and the principle of the minimum of the dissipation potential are both deﬁned
locally for a material point. A solution to this drawback is given by Hamilton’s principle: it is formulated as
variational problem for the entire physical body. Thus, ﬁeld equations, i.e., partial differential equations in
time and space, can be derived from related stationarity conditions. Hamilton’s principle is strongly related to
the principle of stationary action and comprises the principle of virtual work and the principle of the minimum
of the dissipation potential, which all turn out to be special cases of Hamilton’s principle.

===== PAGE 3 =====
An extended Hamilton principle as unifying theory 1933
In this contribution, we aim at highlighting the relation of Hamilton’s principle to the fundamental laws
of thermodynamics and other extremal principles of continuum mechanics. We begin with a short overview
on the history of material modeling and give a brief introduction to thermodynamics. Later, we recall the
principle of stationary action and demonstrate its relation to the 1
st law of thermodynamics. This serves as
basis to present how a generalization of the principle of stationary action, which is originally restricted to rigid
particles, can be used to describe non-conservative deformable solids. Particularly, we show that an extended
Hamilton principle thus might be used for the derivation of material models including ﬁeld equations for all
state variables in thermo-mechanically coupled problems given by {u,θ, α}. Finally, we show basic examples
of thermo-mechanically coupled material models based on the extended Hamilton principle.
2 Brief outline of the history of material modeling
Material modeling comprises the usage of internal variables and strategies to derive governing equations for
describing their evolution. A prominent modeling strategy is the application of variational methods which were
invented far earlier than the concept of internal variables, see [27]. The idea of some quantity that is maximized
or minimized by physical processes roots back to Aristotle or even before, cf. [ 5]. It is strongly related to the
principle of stationary action which was embedded into a rigorous mathematical concept in the late 1700s by
Leibniz, Euler, Maupertuis, Lagrange, and others, see [ 50]. The invention of variational calculus allowed to
solve the problem of brachistochrone as well as light refraction, the motion of a conservative oscillator, and
many more. A related approach is the well-known principle of Castigliano and Menabrea [ 11,40]. A historical
review is presented in [ 8]. Hamilton generalized the principle of stationary action in [ 25,26]. More details
on Hamilton’s principle are given by Bedford [ 4] and Bailey [ 2] who presents a clear distinction of different
energy-based extremal principles.
The usage of internal variables in current sense routes back to the concept of “variables of inner state”
as pioneered by Carnot [ 9], Joule [ 28], and Clausius [ 12]. Afterwards, the concept was put in a sound ther-
modynamic framework by Helmholtz [ 56], Thomson [ 54], Maxwell [ 39], Gibbs [ 20], and Duhem [ 17]( s e e
[27]a n d[ 38] for a detailed historical presentation). In 1931, Onsager used the thermodynamic approach of
thermodynamic ﬂuxes ˙α and thermodynamic forces p. Starting from the (reduced) Clausius–Duhem inequality
p · ˙α ≥ 0 , (5)
he postulated a proportionality which served as fundamental ansatz for material modeling since it fulﬁlls
thermodynamic consistency a priori [ 46,47]. Roughly at the same time, the concept of thermodynamic ﬂuxes
and forces was conveyed to continuum mechanics by Bridgman [7] and Eckart [18]. A time-dependent evolution
was investigated in the general work by Ziegler [ 57]. The thermodynamics of irreversible processes was put
in the 1960s into a more rigorous mathematical framework by Truesdell [ 55] and Coleman and Noll [ 13–15]
who established so-called rational thermodynamics. A further elaboration by Rice [
51] and Lubliner [ 33]
founded in the 1970s the concept of internal variables in its current form. The concept of maximum dissipation
as fundamental strategy for the derivation of evolution equations was given by Lubliner in 1984 [ 34]a n d
Simo in 1988 [ 52]. A concept for complex microstructures was proposed by Ortiz and Repetto in their work
on non-convex energy minimization [ 48] which built upon the mathematical basis of Ball and James [ 3].
An alternative for the principle of maximum dissipation was introduced by the principle of the minimum
of the dissipation potential, published in various forms, e.g., by Martin, Maier, Halphen, Maugin and Hackl
[21,24,35–37]. A comparison between the two approaches was given in [ 22]. Strategies to couple the local
material behavior to non-local ﬁelds can be given by the introduction of penalty terms, see, e.g., [ 16], or by
postulating evolution equations that are added as constraints to the functional by using Lagrange parameters,
see, e.g., the works by Hackl and Fischer [19,23]. It is also worth mentioning that instead of a time-continuous
presentation, time-incremental variational methods for material modeling have been established. Examples are
given in a more numerical setting by Simo [ 53]. A more analytical setting is discussed by Mielke for the case
of ﬁnite elasto-plasticity in [ 43] based on dissipation distances and by Miehe who generalized this approach
to gradient-extended standard dissipative materials [ 42]. More details are also provided in the textbook by
Mielke in 2015 [ 44].
