

===== PAGE 1 =====
EDITED BY
Maribasappa Karched,
Kuwait University, Kuwait
REVIEWED BY
Caroline Dini,
Piracicaba Dental School - UNICAMP, Brazil
Gabrijela Begić,
University of Rijeka, Croatia
*CORRESPONDENCE
Katharina Doll-Nikutta
nikutta.katharina@mh-hannover.de
†These authors have contributed equally to
this work
RECEIVED 18 June 2025
ACCEPTED 12 August 2025
PUBLISHED 04 September 2025
CITATION
Heine N, Bittroff K, Szafra ński SP, Duitscher M,
Behrens W, Vollmer C, Mikolai C,
Kommerein N, Debener N, Frings K,
Heisterkamp A, Scheper T, Torres-Mapa ML,
Bahnemann J, Stiesch M and Doll-Nikutta K
(2025) In ﬂuence of species composition and
cultivation condition on peri-implant bio ﬁlm
dysbiosis in vitro .
Front. Oral Health 6:1649419.
doi: 10.3389/froh.2025.1649419
COPYRIGHT
© 2025 Heine, Bittroff, Szafra ński, Duitscher,
Behrens, Vollmer, Mikolai, Kommerein,
Debener, Frings, Heisterkamp, Scheper,
Torres-Mapa, Bahnemann, Stiesch and Doll-
Nikutta. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the
Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The
use, distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Inﬂuence of species composition
and cultivation condition on peri-
implant bio ﬁlm dysbiosis in vitro
Nils Heine
1,2
, Kristina Bittroff
1,2
, Szymon P. Szafra ński
1,2
,
Maya Duitscher
1,2
, Wiebke Behrens
1,2
, Clarissa Vollmer
1,2
,
Carina Mikolai
1,2
, Nadine Kommerein
1,2
, Nicolas Debener
3
,
Katharina Frings
2,4
, Alexander Heisterkamp
2,4
, Thomas Scheper
2,3
,
Maria L. Torres-Mapa
2,4
, Janina Bahnemann
5,6
, Meike Stiesch
1,2†
and Katharina Doll-Nikutta
1,2*†
1Department of Dental Prosthetics and Biomedical Materials Science, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany, 2Lower Saxony Center for Biomedical Technology, Implant Research and
Development (NIFE), Hannover, Germany, 3Institute of Technical Chemistry, Leibniz University
Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 4Institute of Quantum Optics, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover,
Germany, 5Institute of Physics, University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany, 6Centre for Advanced
Analytics and Predictive Sciences (CAAPS), University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany
Introduction: Changes in bacterial species composition within oral bio ﬁlms,
known as bio ﬁlm dysbiosis, are associated with the development of severe
oral diseases. To better understand this process and help establish early
detection systems, models are needed which replicate oral bio ﬁlm dysbiosis in
vitro – ideally by also mimicking natural salivary ﬂow conditions.
Methods: For this purpose, the present study cultivated two different
combinations of oral commensal and pathogenic strains – Streptococcus
oralis, Actinomyces naeslundii, Veillonella dispar/parvula, Fusobacterium
nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis – comparatively within an
established ﬂow chamber model on the implant material titanium, and
statically in 6-well plates for 21 days. Bio ﬁlm morphology, species distribution,
and bacterial metabolism were analyzed by ﬂuorescence microscopy,
molecular biological methods, and metabolic interaction prediction.
Results: Bioﬁlm growth and composition were strongly in ﬂuenced by bacterial
species selection, and to a more minor extent, by cultivation conditions.
Within the model containing V. dispar and a laboratory P. gingivalis strain, a
diversiﬁcation of commensal species was observed over time along with a
signiﬁcantly reduced pH-value. In contrast, the model containing V. parvula
and the clinical isolate P. gingivalis W83, a dysbiotic shift with increased
pathogen levels, pH-value, and virulence factors was achieved.
Conclusion: Within the present study, different in vitro oral multispecies bio ﬁlm
models were successfully developed. Depending on bacterial species selection,
these models were able to depict the infection-associated dysbiotic shift in
species composition under ﬂow conditions solely by intrinsic interactions and
without the use of external stimuli.
KEYWORDS
dental plaque, dysbiosis, dental implants, microbiological techniques, dynamic
cultivation
TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 04 September 2025
DOI 10.3389/froh.2025.1649419
Frontiers in Oral Health 01 frontiersin.org

===== PAGE 2 =====
1 Introduction
Bacterial bio ﬁlms of the oral cavity – also known as dental
plaque – are associated with the development and progression of
multiple oral diseases. These bio ﬁlms are formed by a multitude
of oral bacterial species that adhere both to surfaces and to each
other. These bacteria successfully protect themselves within an
extracellular matrix, resulting in drastically increased tolerance
towards the immune system and antibiotic treatment. In this
regard, bio ﬁlm formation on dental implants in particular is
closely linked to progressive diseases, since the implant lacks an
innate immune response and other protective anatomical features
(
1). Peri-implant mucositis and peri-implantitis – analogous to
gingivitis and periodontitis on natural teeth – are associated with
severe in ﬂammatory reactions that can lead to subsequent soft-
and hard-tissue destruction. From the microbiological
perspective, the progression of peri-implantitis/periodontitis is
often accompanied by a notable shift in the bio ﬁlm species
composition and activity (
2). Whereas the initial commensal
bioﬁlm is dominated by mitis-group streptococci, Actinomyces
and Veillonella species, advanced disease state bio ﬁlms frequently
exhibit larger amounts of Prevotella and Peptostreptococacae
species ( 2). This process of disease-associated changes in
bacterial species composition is called bacterial dysbiosis.
To prevent the onset of peri-implantitis, early detection of
bacterial dysbiosis would allow for a timely treatment that also
circumvents tolerance development. However, the establishment
of dysbiosis sensors – e.g., based on spectroscopy or
chemometrics – requires reproducible in vitro models to serve as
test systems. Oral multispecies bio ﬁlm in vitro models typically
contain up to ten characteristic bacterial species that are either
sampled from volunteers or commercially available type strains
(
3–5). These bio ﬁlms are grown on various materials (including
implant-grade titanium) for several days or weeks under either
static or salivary shear force-mimicking dynamic conditions (
6,
7). One example is the Hannoverian Oral Multispecies Bio ﬁlm
Implant Flow Chamber (HOBIC) model developed in our group,
which contains the oral commensals Streptococcus oralis ,
Actinomyces naeslundii , Veillonella dispar as well as the oral
pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis (
8). This four-species bio ﬁlm
is grown on titanium discs in custom-made ﬂow chambers
designed for non-invasive microscopic readout. Within the
incubation time of 24 h, reproducible bio ﬁlms of commensal
composition are formed. In contrast, Siddiqui et al. have reported
on a similar six-species bio ﬁlm model on titanium that was
cultivated under static conditions for 21 days (
6). Over time, a
clear shift in bacterial species composition towards the increase
of pathogenic species could be detected. However, this model
lacks the naturally existing ﬂow shear forces.
The aim of the present study was to advance the HOBIC model
and reproduce the bacterial dysbiosis associated with peri-
implantitis in vitro . For this purpose, two different ﬁve-species
combinations were grown comparatively under both static and
dynamic conditions over 21 days and analyzed for bacterial
growth (optical density and pH development), bio ﬁlm
morphology (live/dead ﬂuorescence staining with confocal
microscopy and digital image analysis) and species distribution
(quantitative real-time PCR and ﬂuorescence in situ
hybridization). By this, the research hypotheses that (I) a
bacterial shift can be introduced solely by increasing cultivation
time as well as that (II) the shift depends on species composition
and (III) cultivation conditions were addressed.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Bacterial strains and culture conditions
Bacteria were routinely stored as glycerol stocks at −80°C.
Veillonella dispar DSM 20735 (German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures GmbH, DSMZ, Braunschweig,
Germany), Veillonella parvula ATCC
® 17745TM (American Type
Culture Collection, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), Fusobacterium
nucleatum DSM 15643, Porphyromonas gingivalis DSM 20709
and Porphyromonas gingivalis ATCC W83, were streaked out on
fastidious anaerobe agar (Lab M Ltd., Heywood, UK) plates
supplemented with 5% de ﬁbrinated sheep blood (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and incubated at 37°C under
anaerobic conditions, which were achieved using AnaeroGen
TM
bags (Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc Inc.), for three days. Afterwards,
colonies from the agar plates were transferred to liquid medium
and cultured overnight in brain heart infusion medium (BHI,
Oxoid Deutschland GmbH, Wesel, Germany) supplemented with
10 mg/L vitamin K (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Karlsruhe,
Germany) (BHI + VitK, V. dispar/parvula ) or in fastidious
anaerobe broth (Lab M Ltd., F. nucleatum and P. gingivalis ) at 
37°C under anaerobic conditions. Streptococcus oralis ATCC
9811
TM and Actinomyces naeslundii DSM 43013 were cultured
overnight in BHI + VitK at 37°C under anaerobic conditions.
2.2 Static bio ﬁlm growth in well plates
Bacterial overnight cultures were adjusted to an optical density
at 600 nm (OD
600) of 0.05 in BHI + VitK with 5 mg/L hemin
(BHI + VitK/Hem, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and
mixed in two different ﬁve-species combinations: S. oralis , A.
naeslundii and F. nucleatum were combined either with V. dispar
and P gingivalis DSM 20709 (commensal model) or V. parvula
and P. gingivalis ATCC W83 (dysbiotic model). 5 ml per well of
the mixed suspension were directly added to polystyrene 6-well
plates and incubated for 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, or 21 days at 37°C under
anaerobic conditions. Every other day, half of the medium was
replaced with fresh medium. Before analysis, bio ﬁlms were
washed once with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Sigma Aldrich).
2.3 Bio ﬁlm growth in the adaptive HOBIC
model
The setup of the ﬂow chamber system is shown in
Figure 1A ,
and is based on the previously described “Hannoverian Oral
Heine et al. 10.3389/froh.2025.1649419
Frontiers in
Oral Health 02 frontiersin.org

===== PAGE 3 =====
Multispecies Bio ﬁlm Implant Flow Chamber (HOBIC) ” model ( 8)
with the following modi ﬁcations: In this case, pH-sensitive ﬂow-
through cells connected to optical ﬁbers (FTC-SU-LG1-S,
PreSense Precision Sensing GmbH, Regensburg, Germany) were
integrated behind the ﬂow chambers. Grade 4 titanium discs
(12 mm diameter, 1.5 mm height, R
a = 0.31 µm) were submerged
in arti ﬁcial saliva (850 mg/L mucin, 10 µg/ml lysozyme, 1 mg/ml
α-amylase, 40 µg/ml albumin) during sterile assembly of the
chambers. Then, the chambers were integrated into the system
and 2.1 ml per strain with OD
600 of 0.05 were added to 1.5
L BHI + VitK/Hem in the bioreactor. In addition to the
previously described HOBIC model (
8), F. nucleatum was added
as ﬁfth bacterium to the inoculum for both combinations and V.
dispar and P. gingivalis 20709 were replaced by V. parvula and P.
gingivalisW83 as “dysbiotic” strain combination. After 24 h of
cultivation with 100 µl/min at 37°C under anaerobic conditions,
the components up to the bubble trap (
Figure 1A ) were replaced
with new sterile parts, except for the OD measuring bypass. The
system was then run for 20 additional days with sterile 1:2
diluted medium. On day 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, and 21, chambers were
washed with PBS for 30 min at 100 µl/min before subjected to
further analysis. Optical density of the ﬁrst 24 h and pH
development were recorded with N = 5 replicates per condition.
Statistical comparisons of each parameter between the models at
individual time points were done using 2-way ANOVA with
Śidák’s correction for multiple comparison.
2.4 Live/dead staining and microscopic
analysis
Static and ﬂow chamber bio ﬁlms were stained using SYTO
®9
and propidium iodide (PI) of the LIVE/DEAD ® BacLightTM
Bacterial Viability Kit (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany)
at a concentration of 1:2000 of the stock solutions in PBS,
followed by ﬁxation with 2.5% glutardialdehyde. For staining of
ﬂow chamber bio ﬁlms, the dye and ﬁxation solutions were
pumped through the system as previously described (
8).
Likewise, confocal laser-scanning microscopy was done using
established protocols (
8). For the HOBIC systems, from day 6
onwards, images were taken from the cover slip downwards
rather than directly on the titanium surface, since the laser could
not reach through the thick bio ﬁlm. From at least N = 15 images
per condition, bio ﬁlm volume and live/dead distribution were
quantiﬁed using the software Imaris (v8.4.1, Bitplane AG, Zurich,
Switzerland). For statistical analysis, bio ﬁlm volume data were
tested for normal distribution using D ’Agostino & Pearson
Omnibus Normality test followed by Kruskal –Wallis test with
Dunn’s multiple comparison correction. Bio ﬁlm viability data
were tested using 2-way ANOVA with Tukey ’s multiple
comparison test.
2.5 PMA treatment, DNA extraction, and
qRT-PCR
After microscopy, the bio ﬁlm inside the chambers was
harvested and either directly frozen or subjected to additional
PMA treatment (
9). Following washing with PBS, bacteria were
incubated with 0.2 mM PMAxx TM (Biotium, Inc., Fremont, CA,
USA) for 10 min at 4°C, and then again for 20 min in the
PMA-Lite
TM LED Photolysis Device (Biotium, Inc.). DNA was
extracted using a customized protocol which deploys a
combination of enzymatic lysis, mechanical disruption, and
column-based DNA isolation. Bacterial sample material was
initially treated with 450 µl lysozyme solution [20 mg/ml
lysozyme (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in 20 mM Tris HCl, pH
8.0; 2 mM EDTA; 1,2% Triton] for two hours at 37°C. After
FIGURE 1
Bacterial growth in the hannoverian oral multispecies bio ﬁlm implant ﬂow chamber (HOBIC) model. (A) Schematics of the ﬂow chamber system with
indicated components. Blue arrows indicate ﬂow direction with 100 µl/min. Created with BioRender, Winkel. A. (2025)
https://BioRender.com/
d73y389. (B) Bacterial growth curves (mean ± standard deviation) of commensal and dysbiotic species composition within the ﬁrst 24 h in the
bioreactor measured by an inline photometer at λ = 600 nm. Signi ﬁcant differences (*) between the commensal and dysbiotic model after 18 and
24 h could be identi ﬁed with p ≤ 0.05 ( N = 5).
Heine et al. 10.3389/froh.2025.1649419
Frontiers in
Oral Health 03 frontiersin.org